DDEV for JS article (#8)
andy-blum/andy-blum: src/articles/2024-01-21_DDEV-for-js.md

---

> title: DDEV For JavaScript Development

Reviewer: I know that "Node.js development" doesn't totally describe this, but it's a smaller category than just JS.

```suggestion
title: Node.js Development with DDEV
```

created: 2024-01-21T00:00:00-05:00
type: article
permalink: "articles/ddev-for-js/"

> tags: [drupal]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tags: [drupal,ddev,node.js]
```

summary: ""
---

> For much of the Drupal community, I imagine, [DDEV](https://ddev.com/) is a familiar tool for local development. It allows developers that want to work with their own sandboxed version of a website to spin up a set of containers that behave like a regular server-hosted copy of the site. The local version gets a nice URL, has its own database, and can run PHP all in the container - regardless of whether the host machine has that software installed. While DDEV is pretty ubiquitious in CMS communities like Drupal, WordPress, and Typo3, it's perhaps not as familiar to developers working in Node.js, Python, or other decoupled setups. This blog post is for _those_ developers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[DDEV](https://ddev.com/) is a familiar tool for local development in the Drupal community. It allows developers that want to work with their own sandboxed version of a website to spin up a set of containers that behave like a regular server-hosted copy of the site. The local version gets a nice URL, has its own database, and can run PHP all in the container - regardless of whether the host machine has that software installed. While DDEV is pretty ubiquitious in CMS communities like Drupal, WordPress, and Typo3, it's perhaps not as familiar to developers working in Node.js, Python, or other decoupled setups. This blog post is for _those_ developers.
```

## What is DDEV?

Straight from [the documentation](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/stable/), "DDEV is an open source tool for launching local web development environments in minutes. It supports PHP, Node.js, and Python (experimental)." Furthermore, "DDEV is a Go application that stores its configuration in files on your workstation. It uses those blueprints to mount your project files into Docker containers that facilitate the operation of a local development environment. DDEV writes and uses docker-compose files for you, which is a detail you can cheerfully ignore unless you’re Docker-curious or defining your own services."

> As a front-end developer with no interest or experience in DevOps, the key feature for _why_ you should consider DDEV is standardized environments for every member of a team working on the same project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a front-end developer with no interest or experience in DevOps, the key feature for _why_ you should consider DDEV is standardized environments for every member of a team working on the same project.
```

Sure, but I think this just makes the argument for using VMs or containerized solutions in general. Why not docker compose, or lando, or whatever?

Perhaps something like "As a front-end developer, I've found DDEV to be a great solution because it lets us have standardized environments for every team member, yet those team members don't have to have interest or experience in DevOps work".

> ## Why would I do this instead of a Node/Python server?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Why would I use DDEV instead of a Node or Python server directly?
```

> If you're successfully developing with some other solution running on a localhost port, you might be fine sticking with that. In my experience, however, there are a couple of significant downsides and painpoints to working from a node process running in the terminal:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're successfully developing with some other solution running on a localhost port, you might be fine sticking with that. In my experience, there are a couple of significant downsides and pain-points to working from a node process running in the terminal:
```

1. The process has to continue un-interrupted. If you're an obsessive tab-closer like me, you've probably accidentally quit a running process once or twice. It's not a huge problem to start the process back up, but if you're running the process inside a container you can't accidentally quit it.

2. If you need to switch between several projects using the same tech stack they might all be configured to run on the same port. Again, not an issue as many processes will detect the in-use port and suggest an alternative, but as you move to the browser, all your projects are running on very similar ports, and they might not be the same port every visit. With DDEV, each project gets a URL appended to your local DNS records which points to a router container. Your projects will _never_ conflict, and their URLs will _never_ change.

> 3. Similar to #2, if you're working on a project with a decoupled front and back-end, your project probably has some CORS configuration setup. With DDEV, you can add the DDEV-generated URL to that CORS config and not have to worry about ports changing over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Similar to #2, if you're working on a project with a decoupled front and back-end, your project probably has some CORS configuration setup. With DDEV, you can add the DDEV-generated URL to that CORS config and not have to worry about ports changing over time.

4. If you're collaborating with a team, their local setup may not be the same as yours, so you may have to help them all the time to get everything properly set up. 
```

> 3. Similar to #2, if you're working on a project with a decoupled front and back-end, your project probably has some CORS configuration setup. With DDEV, you can add the DDEV-generated URL to that CORS config and not have to worry about ports changing over time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Similar to #2, if you're working on a project with a decoupled front and back-end, your project probably has some CORS configuration setup. With DDEV, you can add the DDEV-generated URL to that CORS config and not have to worry about ports changing over time. DDEV also sets up HTTPS so all browser features work as they would in production.
```

## How do I start?

> _Heads up from future me: I'm working on a ddev addon that will handle **a lot** of this work for you. It can be found [here](https://github.com/andy-blum/ddev-pm2)_

Reviewer: Yay! Subscribed.

Your first step is to install DDEV and its dependencies to your host machine. There's a pretty solid set of instructions [in the docs](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/stable/users/install/ddev-installation/).

Once you've got DDEV ready to go, navigate to the root of your project. For the purposes of this article, we'll be working on a hypothetical project using [Keystone CMS](https://keystonejs.com/) for the backend and [Sveltekit](https://kit.svelte.dev/) for the frontend.

If you'd like to have actual running apps for both of these to see everything working, use each app's quickstart commands:

```txt
$ npm create keystone-app keystone

> ```

Reviewer: I would have them create the project directory (and `ddev config`) first and then use `ddev npm` for these steps.

```txt
$ npm create svelte@latest svelte
```

Both of these commands will end with instructions to start the applications, but we'll skip that for now. Our project structure should now look like this:

```txt
my-project
|- keystone
|- svelte
```

From `my-project`, run `ddev config`.

```txt

> $ ddev config

Reviewer: I think I'd just do `ddev config --auto` here since they don't care about anything it discovers.

Or consider `ddev config --additional-hostnames=api.my-project,app.my-project`, but that may be skipping too many tutorial steps.

Reviewer 2: When you write this, also worth calling out that you'd commit `.ddev` to your project repo, so this step is only needed for one developer to do once.

If you run `ddev start` now, you'll have a working `web` and `db` container!

```txt
$ ddev start

Starting my-project...
Network ddev-my-project_default created
Building project images...
Project images built in 0s.
 Container ddev-my-project-db  Created
 Container ddev-my-project-web  Created
 Container ddev-my-project-web  Started
 Container ddev-my-project-db  Started
You have Mutagen enabled and your 'php' project type doesn't have `upload_dirs` set.
For faster startup and less disk usage, set upload_dirs to where your user-generated files are stored.
If this is intended you can disable this warning with `ddev config --disable-upload-dirs-warning`.
Starting Mutagen sync process...
Mutagen sync flush completed in 1s.
For details on sync status 'ddev mutagen st my-project -l'
Waiting for web/db containers to become ready: [web db]
^[Starting ddev-router if necessary...
 Container ddev-router  Running
Waiting for additional project containers to become ready...
All project containers are now ready.
Successfully started my-project

> Project can be reached at https://my-project.ddev.site https://127.0.0.1:33125

Reviewer 2: I wonder if it's worth pushing up the actual repo (with a name other than `my-project`), and immediately archiving it.

Author: This seems like a good idea. I'll try to take up @rfay on his offer of an on-call walkthrough and then add each step in its own commit.

```

## Configuring for non-PHP projects

> While our project is running, there's some configuration we need to change. Open `my-project/.ddev/config.yml`:
> 
> ```yml

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While our project is running, there's some configuration we need to change. Open `my-project/.ddev/config.yml`. It should look similar to this default configuration that is generated as of ddev v1.22.7.

```yml
```

name: my-project
type: php
docroot: ""
php_version: "8.1"
webserver_type: nginx-fpm
xdebug_enabled: false
additional_hostnames: []
additional_fqdns: []
database:
  type: mariadb
  version: "10.4"
use_dns_when_possible: true
composer_version: "2"
web_environment: []
```

### Add additional hostnames

> DDEV is _highly_ configurable. All the key/value options are [documented here](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/configuration/config). There are two main things we want to edit here. We're first going to add additional hostnames. Since keystone will be running our backend, we'll have it accessible at `api.my-project.ddev.site`, and since Sveltekit is running our frontend app, we'll have itat `app.my-project.ddev.site`. The default URL will also exist at `my-project.ddev.site`, but DDEV's container healthcheck needs to be able to access php on that URL, so we'll leave it alone.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DDEV is _highly_ configurable. All the key/value options are [documented here](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/latest/users/configuration/config). There are two main things we want to edit here. We're first going to add additional hostnames. Since Keystone will be running our backend, we'll have it accessible at `api.my-project.ddev.site`, and since Sveltekit is running our frontend app, we'll have it at `app.my-project.ddev.site`. The default URL will also exist at `my-project.ddev.site`, but DDEV's container healthcheck needs to be able to access php on that URL, so we'll leave it alone.
```

```yml
additional_hostnames:
  - "api.my-project"
  - "app.my-project"
```

### Standardize your node version

Next, we want to specify our Node version. This can be either a generic major version like `20` or a specific release like `16.4.2`. Since we want to avoid the "it works on my machine" problems, this value should match what you're running in production.

```yml

> nodejs_version: "20"

Reviewer: If it matters, give an explicit patch version here. Maybe that's a good example, maybe it's not?

```

### Customize your webserver config

The next thing we need to do is override how DDEV has configured the webserver. Right now, _all_ requests coming into the `web` container are sent to `/my-project/` to look for an `index.html` or `index.php` file, regardless of URL. We'll need to add our nginx or apache configuration files (depending on your config.yml file) to proxy requests to the correct ports in the web container. Your default nginx configuration is in `.ddev/nginx_full/nginx-site.conf` and your default apache configuration is in `.ddev/apache/apache-site.conf`. Both of these files are auto-generated and we'll leave them alone. In both cases, there's a file `seconddocroot.conf.example` that we'll edit instead. Since we have two additional URLs (`app.my-project.ddev.site` and `api.my-project.ddev.site`), we'll need to make a config file for each. In the examples below, I've only included the files for the `app` subdomain.

> #### Configuring Nginx

Reviewer: Make clear that you *either* do nginx *or* apache, don't have to do both.

Reviewer: I think it's worth explaining a little bit about what we're doing here with proxy_pass and friends... sending certain types of requests to the Node.js server.

The main parts to consider here are the values of `server_name` and `proxy_pass`. The `server_name` must match the URL you wish to use, and the port number in `proxy_pass` needs to match the port in the container that's in use by the node process.

If you used the quickstart commands above, keystone runs on port 3000 and svelte will be on 5173.

```conf
server {

  server_name app.my-project.ddev.site;

  location / {
    proxy_pass http://localhost:5173;
    proxy_http_version 1.1;
    proxy_set_header Upgrade $http_upgrade;
    proxy_set_header Connection 'upgrade';
    proxy_set_header Host $host;
    proxy_cache_bypass $http_upgrade;
  }

  listen 80;
  listen 443 ssl;

  ssl_certificate /etc/ssl/certs/master.crt;
  ssl_certificate_key /etc/ssl/certs/master.key;

  include /etc/nginx/monitoring.conf;

  error_log /dev/stdout info;
  access_log /var/log/nginx/access.log;

  include /etc/nginx/common.d/*.conf;
  include /mnt/ddev_config/nginx/*.conf;
}
```

#### Configuring Apache

> Apache configuration will require two VirtualHost entries per URL. Similar to the nginX config above, we need to specify the URL we wish to use and the port we're proxying to. You'll need to edit the values `ServerName`, `ProxyPass`, and `ProxyPassReverse` in each vhost.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Apache configuration will require two VirtualHost entries per URL. Similar to the nginx config above, we need to specify the URL we wish to use and the port we're proxying to. You'll need to edit the values `ServerName`, `ProxyPass`, and `ProxyPassReverse` in each vhost.
```

```

At this point, your new URLs will point into the webserver at the correct ports, but our apps aren't running. We could stop here and either pass commands in with `ddev exec` or tunnel in with `ddev ssh` to start the node processes inside the web container.

```txt
$ ddev ssh

andy@my-project-web:/var/www/html$ cd svelte/
andy@my-project-web:/var/www/html/svelte$ npm run dev
```

But if we run our apps this way, it's an extra step to onboard new devs with & we still have a terminal window taken over by the process. Let's boost the developer experience.

## Developer Experience Improvements

There are three main DX improvements we can make to make onboarding new developers as seamless as possible. First, we can utilize a process management tool like PM2 to manage our processes in the container. Second, we can make some custom commands to create easy-to-remember startup directions or to handle specific tools in the container. Third, DDEV has the ability to run commands both on the host machine and in the containers during a few key lifecycle stages.

### Using PM2

> [PM2](https://pm2.keymetrics.io/) is an "Advanced, production process manager for Node.JS". We can use this tool to start our app without clogging up an entire terminal pane and it will also allow us to monitor the process's logs, memory usage, and some other key stats. There are a ton of options available, but we'll just use a few basics.

Reviewer 2: > production process manager for Node.JS". We can use this tool to start our app without clogging up an entire terminal pane

You're solving the wrong problem and just need more monitors 😂

> PM2's instructions tell us to install the tool globally, so we'll handle during DDEV's build process with a custom Dockerfile in `.ddev/web-build/Dockerfile`. For more info on how DDEV handles custom Dockerfiles, see [here](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/stable/users/extend/customizing-images/#adding-extra-dockerfiles-for-webimage-and-dbimage)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PM2's instructions tell us to install the tool globally, so we'll handle during DDEV's build process with a custom Dockerfile in `.ddev/web-build/Dockerfile`. For more info on how DDEV handles custom Dockerfiles, see [Adding Extra Dockerfiles for webimage and dbimage](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/stable/users/extend/customizing-images/#adding-extra-dockerfiles-for-webimage-and-dbimage) in the DDEV documentation.
```

```Dockerfile

> RUN npm install -g pm2

Reviewer 2: This should specify a version. Otherwise, if you need to upgrade, it won't force a rebuild on other developer machines (or even your own!).

```

We can then setup our PM2 config by adding a file `apps.config.js`. This file will name our processes, tell PM2 where to run the start command, as well as what command to run. For a full list of config options see the [relevant docs](https://pm2.keymetrics.io/docs/usage/application-declaration/)

```js
module.exports = {
  apps : [
    {
      name: "Svelte",
      cwd: "/var/www/html/svelte",
      script: "npm run dev"
    },
    {
      name: "Keystone",
      cwd: "/var/www/html/keystone",
      script: "npm run dev"
    }
  ]
}
```

### Post-start hooks

With PM2 successfully added into the container & configured for our apps, we can now utilize [DDEV's Hooks](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/stable/users/configuration/hooks/) to run a command on startup. In our `.ddev/config.yml` file, add the following:

```yml
hooks:
  post-start:

>     - exec: "pm2 start apps.config.js"

Reviewer: I think you'll like doing this better with `web_extra_daemons`, https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/stable/users/extend/customization-extendibility/#running-extra-daemons-in-the-web-container

Author: What's the benefit of using `web_extra_daemons` over post-start hook?

Reviewer: `web_extra_daemons` automatically starts things up. I guess it's more "integrated". But I don't see any problem with either way.

```

### Custom DDEV commands

Finally, to interact with PM2 running in the container, we can add a [custom ddev command](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/stable/users/extend/custom-commands/) in `.ddev/commands/web/pm2`

```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash

## Description: Run PM2 commands in the container
## Usage: pm2
## Example: "ddev pm2 monit"

pm2 "$@"
```

## One thing that still bugs me

> There's one part of this I still haven't quite figured out. Since I'm working on a mac with the new ARM architecture and the container is running linux, I have to run `npm install` in the container to get the right versions of some of the dependencies. If I install the requisite `node_module` on the host machine, the processes will error out if I try to run them inside the container. For right now the easiest way to handle this issue is to chain the install and start commands together in the PM2 config file:

Reviewer: I recommend never using npm on the host, only in the container `ddev npm` or `ddev ssh` and use npm.

```suggestion
There's one part of this I still haven't quite figured out. Since I'm working on a mac with the new ARM architecture and the container is running linux, I have to run `npm install` in the container to get the right versions of some of the dependencies. If I install the requisite `node_modules` on the host machine, the processes will error out if I try to run them inside the container. For right now the easiest way to handle this issue is to chain the install and start commands together in the PM2 config file:
```

Author: The one counterpoint I have for that _specifically_ for this blog post, is that teams that already have a node app working on the host machine might not immediately understand whats happening when they introduce DDEV to the mix.

Reviewer: I certainly understand that, and it normally works out. But of course it leads to the kind of problems you mention, and more complex ones than that, differing node versions, etc. Same problem as with php and composer. In working on the ddev.com setup I'm sometimes happier working with local npm and sometimes with the ddev setup. But if it were a team usually working on something complicaited, I'd go for ddev-encapsulated every time. https://github.com/ddev/ddev.com

> There's one part of this I still haven't quite figured out. Since I'm working on a mac with the new ARM architecture and the container is running linux, I have to run `npm install` in the container to get the right versions of some of the dependencies. If I install the requisite `node_module` on the host machine, the processes will error out if I try to run them inside the container. For right now the easiest way to handle this issue is to chain the install and start commands together in the PM2 config file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There's one part of this I still haven't quite figured out. Since I'm working on a Mac with the new ARM architecture and the container is running linux, I have to run `npm install` in the container to get the right versions of some of the dependencies. If I install the requisite `node_module` on the host machine, the processes will error out if I try to run them inside the container. For right now the easiest way to handle this issue is to chain the install and start commands together in the PM2 config file:
```

I think you could solve this by having pm2 (and the earlier example) not run the app, but always do something like `npm ci && npm run dev`. That way, you know the state of node_modules is consistent (and built inside ddev).

```js
module.exports = {
  apps : [
    {
      name: "Svelte",
      cwd: "/var/www/html/svelte",

>       script: "rm -rf node_modules && npm install && npm run dev"

Reviewer 2: Ah! You almost have it here. I actually think this is a decent way to run this. However, this is where I think a process manager like pm2 falls short. You often would want to restart without running npm ci.

Perhaps you could make it so npm ci is run once, on container startup, and not in pm2.

```suggestion
      script: "npm ci && npm run dev"
```

Author: @deviantintegral what about this:

```
{
      name: "Svelte",
      cwd: "/var/www/html/svelte",
      script: "npm run dev || (npm ci && npm run dev)"
}
```

In this way, the application attempts to go straight to start up, and in the case of a failure, does a `npm ci` and then trying again. Anything beyond that then becomes a debugging issue.

Author: I had to bail on `npm ci` for this blog post, thanks to how the Keystone quickstart works. It installs the app - without adding a package-lock.json for some reason. This absence breaks `npm ci`. I've updated the command to `npm run dev || (rm -rf node_modules && npm install && npm run dev)`. This should be able to handle host/container mismatch problems gracefully enough, I think.

Reviewer 2: Makes sense. I think you should probably call out `npm ci` as the most reliable and preferred way to install dependencies, even if keystone can't do it.

3. Similar to #2, if you're working on a project with a decoupled front and back-end, your project probably has some CORS configuration setup. With DDEV, you can add the DDEV-generated URL to that CORS config and not have to worry about ports changing over time. DDEV also sets up HTTPS so all browser features work as they would in production.

4. [DDEV provides support for several database types](https://ddev.readthedocs.io/en/stable/users/extend/database-types/), allowing you to do development work with a development database that matches your production environment. No need to configure your local version to SQLite or connect local apps to cloud database providers.

5. If you're collaborating with a team, their local setup may not be the same as yours, so you may have to help them all the time to get everything properly set up.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

6. In DDEV each project has its own Node.JS version, so you don't have to fiddle with your computer when one project has a different requirement.
```

pm2 "$@"
```
This will allow us to use `ddev pm2 <command>` to interact with our daemonized node applications. The main commands I've found myself using are `list`, `monit`, and `log <process>`. If, for some reason, one of your apps crashes, you can also use `ddev pm2 restart <name>`

```txt
$ ddev pm2 list

┌────┬────────────────────┬──────────┬──────┬───────────┬──────────┬──────────┐
│ id │ name               │ mode     │ ↺    │ status    │ cpu      │ memory   │
├────┼────────────────────┼──────────┼──────┼───────────┼──────────┼──────────┤
│ 1  │ Keystone           │ fork     │ 0    │ online    │ 0%       │ 6.5mb    │
│ 0  │ Svelte             │ fork     │ 0    │ online    │ 0%       │ 6.5mb    │
└────┴────────────────────┴──────────┴──────┴───────────┴──────────┴──────────┘
```

> ```txt

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```console
```

│                     ││                                                     │
│                     ││                                                     │
│                     ││                                                     │
│                     ││                                                     │
│                     ││                                                     │
│                     ││                                                     │
│                     ││                                                     │
│                     ││                                                     │
└─────────────────────┘└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
┌─ Custom Metrics ────┐┌─ Metadata ──────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                     ││ App Name              Keystone                      │
│                     ││ Namespace             default                       │
│                     ││ Version               N/A                           │
└─────────────────────┘└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
 left/right: switch boards | up/down/mouse: scroll | Ctrl-C: exit
 ```

>  ```txt

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 ```console
```
